i get letters and a great many of my
youtube videos
are composed in response to questions
and comments
sent in by viewers like you
and once in a while there's a topic and
i pause and reflect
that nobody has ever asked me about it
despite
the constant inflow of emails questions
i get on various
social media formats i got people
telling me about the positive impact
i've had in their lives
that they quit video games or they quit
drugs or became vegan
or whatever it is they stopped following
one cult leader or another
because of the influence of my youtube
channel because the questions we've
entertained here at the discussion we've
had
the last five years how many people have
ever
written into me wanting to talk to me
about are asking me about
war how many people have ever asked me
about
the war this is 2021
we're coming to the end of a significant
period of history
in which the war has a self-evident
meaning
i remember when i was a kid i must have
been 11 years old exactly
asking my father when people say the war
which war do they mean because i really
noticed that
my father did not handle the question
either and
sometimes at that they were referring to
the vietnam war
in those days you know and sometimes it
was world war ii that was self-heavenly
the war
if people said that in english well from
september 11th 2001
up to september 11th it's been a
self-evident meaning to
the war what about war as such all right
this is a salast s-a-l-l-u-s-t
one of the most famous and influential
authors out of
ancient rome never heard anyone
mention to me even once no professor has
ever quoted him to me
never seen him cited into it shows you
what kind of company i keep
shows the low quality of intellectual
discourse frankly among the phd holding
people in my life
i've never heard anyone quite recently
found out about salas
and he opens by telling you and this
this was studied by many
impressionable young men for many
centuries
do you want to be a man do you want to
live your life like a cow
let me tell you what the difference is
between being truly human
and being a cow the answer has a whole
lot to do with
war and conquest and empire virtue
yes and the cultivation of the intel
intellect yes but it's a very war-like
view of what it is to be a man and what
is to be a human being
life life on earth um we had this broad
cultural transition certainly punctuated
by
the invention of the atom bomb you know
from holding up war as an unquestioned
and unquestionable virtue for young men
over to presenting it as a similarly
unquestioned and questionable
evil and you may not have picked up on
this on my youtube channel
but i don't regard war as either one i
really do regard war
as a meaningful and important part of
politics
and a meaningful and important part of
life that we have to learn to examine
with a certain kind of detachment
that rejects both of these extremes
why is it you suppose that people don't
write it to me asking to know what i
think about
the war why is it that so few people
want to know what i have to say about
the american wars
in our time given that we're really now
as never before in a period of
evaluating the meaning and significance
of the american empire both looking back
and looking ahead well for one thing if
talking about my audience
and my um i don't know apparition
here on youtube like the illusion of who
i am in as much as my audience
gets to know me keep in mind that in the
early days of this channel
there was a widespread expectation that
because
i was vegan because i talked about the
disasters horrors the atrocities
of the american war in vietnam laos and
cambodia
you know that i would be someone who was
the staunchest
peacenik imaginable that i would be more
anti-war
than the stereotypical vegan hippie
and probably if you quote me in certain
contexts
it may it may sound that way my position
on war may may lend itself
to that analysis i think the biggest
problem we have now
in talking and thinking clearly about
war in western democracies
really comes down to a habit of mind
that treats capability as something
quite separate from the ethical decision
about what you're going to do about what
you should do about what the right thing
to do
is had so many debates
on this channel and kind of intersecting
with the work i do on this channel
which begin with someone saying well let
me give you a hypothetical question
and they want to pose a hypothetical
question
that completely separates the question
of what you can do
from what you should do and when we're
really talking about ethics we're really
talking about politics we're making
decisions in our own lives as
individuals on a
massive scale as nations as empires for
the future plan as a whole
what we have to deal with precisely is
the way in which what you can do
is inextricably tied up with
what you should do if there is a man
drowning
and somebody sees him from the safety of
the beach
should he jump in and swim out and
attempt to rescue
the droning man don't you think it
matters the question of whether or not
he can rescue the drowning man
what if the person on the shore who sees
the drowning man
has no legs that someone can find you in
a wheelchair
with no legs do you think they're going
to be able to swim out and rescue the
others
or do you think that if they swim out of
the ocean
they may drown before the man there
they're going out
to rescue i just heard in great detail
recently a guy's account of how he
almost
died drowning in the ocean in california
not worth telling the tale any detail
but
five or six people were standing on the
shore
looking at him with their phones out
trying to figure out what to do
and then one young man who actually had
lifeguard training
ran up went out and rescued him he was
out there drowning
for quite a long time and there were
these five or six kind of gawkers and
onlookers like well
you can call an ambulance what do you
want to do
now all of those people had legs now the
way this guy tells the story he just
says how great it is that this one young
man
rescued him and he tried to give the
young man money and he refused like
after he'd saved his life like he tried
to do something and
i refused to be receive any reward for
his good work whatever
interesting story in different ways but
the story is told in such a way that it
completely ignores
the onlookers who stood there and either
did nothing or did almost nothing
that there was only one person who swam
out to rescue you
but why does this matter look i i don't
know maybe maybe all those people were
400 pounds overweight like i don't know
i mean there are aspects to the story i
don't know
maybe if you just saw a photograph of
these people at the beach like yeah yeah
i get it i see why you didn't so am i
capability morality obligation and
indeed
virtue and these things they are you
know they're inextricably bound up
together process we have to do is stop
training ourselves to think in this
hypothetical way that separates
actions from abilities and consequences
that treats decisions
and so they can be isolated from whether
or not you actually have the capability
to
do to do the thing being discussed now
off the coast of greece
there's a tiny island called cyprus in
greek
kupros it's part of the origin of our
word for
copper cupric so it's one of the most
ancient and important civilizations not
just in the history of europe
but in the history of the world half of
the island
is occupied illegally by turkey
do you think that greece should
start a war with turkey by invading
the island of cyprus and reunifying
cyprus
under one government driving out the
turks
do you think that greece can
now if you're really thinking it through
step by step
over a five-year period over a 20-year
period
spoilers the americans in afghanistan 20
years
the question of capability is much more
important
qualitatively not just qualitatively
than we first want to admit to ourselves
right do you
think that an alliance of
greece and france and italy
should combine all of their armed forces
navy
air force land army and invade the
island of cyprus
and drive out the turks oh oh
oh now that seems like a very different
proposition not because of the question
of whether or not they should
but because the question of whether or
not they can and what you may not be
entirely aware of is that you're not
just thinking about whether or not it's
possible you're thinking about whether
or not it could be
rapid whether or not the invasion and
conquest
could be so to speak irresistible
and sudden or
if it would be a situation like the
korean war aka the korean civil war
where over many years the armies march
from south to north and north to south
there are incredible casualties it goes
back and forth
again again and oh yes isn't the
question of north korea
also a very interesting hypothetical
thought experiment we were not
questioning
whether war would be good or bad but
whether or not it would be possible
and at what cost it seems to be very
easy for people to
imagine that the united states could
suddenly
and irresistibly conquer north korea and
basically anyone who sat down and looked
at u.s military simulations
realized this is not the case america
could conquer north korea
america could at tremendous cost
tremendous cost in fortune and in blood
in casualties with tremendous
consequences they could
do it but not quickly not
easily and wouldn't it be different
wouldn't it be a different question
ethically if they could
do it quickly and easily right and this
is
how we get to the bottom of the riddle
of american imperialism
and really the total abject failure of
the american empire
since the end of world war ii it sounds
somewhat surreal we could actually talk
about the failure of the american empire
during world war ii another very
interesting discussion
how things really went very wrong for
america during that period
even though of course it's remembered as
a as a great victory
um
americans think about politics and think
about
war as if it is a foregone conclusion
that they have the expertise that they
have the capability
to resolve any and all of these
conflicts
instantaneously with a minimal body
count with minimum
consequences in a minimal number of
years
and what history has proven them again
and again and again is that that's just
not the case
now
somebody is in a lot of pain and
weeping and yelling lying on the floor
of a train station because they're
trying to give birth
to a baby would you
run up and help them deliver the baby
you personally when you got to the front
people
oh well why why are you trying to help
it's because you're the most
compassionate or the most concerned
would you be willing to lie and say that
you're a surgeon
when you're not one right see what
you're getting here
this question of competence
we think of it in english-speaking
western culture
as if it's something amoral as if it's
something separate from it
outside of the realm of the ethical
question of whether or not one ought to
do something well somebody is in pain
whether it's somebody drowning or
someone giving a giving birth to a baby
someone ought to help but the question
i'm asking is
should that someone be you if you have
no medical education if you have no
training if there is the very real
possibility
that you will make the process of this
woman giving birth
worse rather than better through your
intervention
what then can we say about your moral
decision
to intervene alright so the question of
capacity is
really the question of confidence
even is inextricably
profoundly bound up in these questions
about
you know military and political
decisions
since world war ii ended
did the united states have the
competence or the capacity
to bring democracy to cuba
the answer is no they lost
they failed how about haiti
how well did the united states do in
haiti have they stabilized haiti if they
created democracy and and look at it
decade by decade
since world war ii what happened with
u.s policy in haiti how did that
go how about vietnam
how about cambodia how about myanmar
as we keep going down the list
how about colombia how did colombia work
out for the americans
um what we have is one
warning after another that the americans
do not have what it takes to resolve any
of these conflicts now if there were
some tremendously powerful foreign
country
that could intervene militarily
and bring about a total occupation of
the island of cyprus
and the turkish occupation of half of
the island create a
you know regular democracy with normal
elections human rights
and the crisis on cyprus once and for
all should they do it yes
they should do it is the united states
that country
can the united states do for cyprus
what they did for south korea
or would the disaster of american
intervention
making an enemy out of turkey as never
before with all these long-term
consequences
possibly resulting in nuclear missiles
being fired one doesn't know
you know you could come up with the best
case get a scenario in a worst case
scenario
right or would an american intervention
and a war with turkey would that turn
out as badly as vietnam
would that turn out as badly as the wars
we've just lived through
in afghanistan and iraq where we look
back 20 years later
right this really does come down to the
sort of question of
if someone's in pain if someone is
struggling to give birth
at a train station or a bus station you
know it's not the question of whether or
not someone should help
the question is who and americans
have always lacked the humility
to take that look in the mirror and say
it's not
me and if not me
maybe it's you